# Dissimtor

## Project and description

Histocompatibility Leukocyte Antigens (HLA)-binding peptides, including mutated 
peptides and other cancer-derived peptides, are exposed on the cell surface to 
be recognized by cytotoxic T cells. Immunopeptidomics, using mass spectrometry 
(MS), is the standard method to identify these peptides but suffers from limited 
sensitivity, complicating neo-antigen discovery. Unlike total proteomics, in which 
proteins are cleaved into peptides using trypsin, HLA-I peptides are non-specifically 
cleaved endogenously by proteasomes or proteases, leading to diverse ionization 
efficiencies and challenges in sequencing. The absence of defined cleavage rules 
expands the MS search space and increases false discovery rates.

Decoy searches with random sequences help estimate false discovery rates by comparing 
“real” and decoy peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs). Accurate discrimination between them 
is crucial for detecting more peptides. Advances like deep learning-enhanced pipelines 
now improve sensitivity, using PSM rescoring based on retention time or MS/MS fragmentation 
predictions.

The highly polymorphic HLA-I locus allows up to six alleles per individual, diversifying 
peptide-binding preferences. Each allele recognizes peptides with conserved binding motifs. 
We propose a machine learning model to re-score MS identifications by analyzing the affinity 
of a peptide for an HLA-I allele based on its amino acid composition.

## Repository structure

In this repository we find:

* `training_ann_dissimtor.py`: Python script to create an artificial neural network (ANN) 
for an HLA-I allele. It uses as a dataset peptides that are described in the literature 
as binding peptides to that HLA-I allele (using the IEDB database) and non binding 
peptides, which are random amino acid sequences.

  In this script, the best hyperparameters of the ANN are first chosen using the
  stratified k-fold cross validation (SKF) method based on the performance of 
  the model on the validation subset.

  The model is then created with the chosen hyperparameters, trained (using the 
  complete training-validation subset (80% of the dataset)) and evaluated (with 
  the test subset (20% of the dataset)), calculating metrics such as the test 
  loss (mean squared error, MSE) and the area under the ROC curve (AUC).

* `ANN_alleles`: directory with the ANNs created with the script `training_ann_dissimtor.py` 
(one for each HLA-I allele). The list of alleles for which ANNs are available can be queried 
using the `--list_alleles` argument. For alleles without an ANN, the file `hla_ann_equivalence.csv`
 provides the most similar available allele whose ANN will be used as a substitute.

  **Note**: it is not necessary to run the `training_ann_dissimtor.py` script 
  to generate the ANNs, since these have been previously generated and are provided 
  in that directory.

  Inside this directory we find the `test_subset` directory, which contains the test 
  subsets used when creating the ANNs (which has not been used to create and train the 
  models). The test subset can be saved using the `--save-test-subset` argument (see 
  'User guide > Running training_ann_dissimtor in command line interface (headless mode)' 
  for more details). 

* `dissimtor_v1.0_msfragger.py`: Python script that processes the output from FragPipe (.pin)
 using a 100% false discovery rate (FDR) (i.e., search results from MSFragger without 
 Percolator filtering) and a user-specified allele ANN (generated by 
 `training_ann_dissimtor.py`) to calculate a score representing the peptide's affinity
  for specified HLA-I alleles (referred to as the Dissimtor score or "DisScore").

  Finally, the Dissimtor output (.pin) includes an additional column called "DisScore". 
  This file is then used as input for Percolator with the desired FDR (0.01 by default). 
  Therefore, Dissimtor serves as an intermediate step between MSFragger and Percolator.

- `requirements.txt`: document containing the Python modules required to use
`training_ann_dissimtor.py` and `dissimtor_v1.0_msfragger.py`.

* `test`: directory with a FragPipe output (`v22_Ref8819_MCP_Raji_02_18_20230712.pin`) 
using FDR of 100%, which is an example of Dissimtor's `input_file` (search results from 
MSFragger without being filtered by Percolator). In particular, this is an example of Raji 
cells with HLA_A0301, HLA_B1510, HLA_C0304 and HLA_C0401 alleles. For more details, see 
'Example' section.

## Requirements and installation

* Python. You need to have [Python](https://www.python.org/downloads/) installed,
as well as the Python modules needed to use Dissimtor, which are found in 
`requeriments.txt`. To install these modules, use the following commands in the
terminal or command line:

  ```bash
  pip install -r requirements.txt
  ```

* FragPipe is a complete proteomics pipeline with the MSFragger search engine at 
heart. In most cases, search results from MsFragger must be filtered by Percolator. 
For more details, visit their [website](https://fragpipe.nesvilab.org/docs/tutorial_fragpipe.html).

  Because Dissimtor is an intermediate step between MSFragger and Percolator, here 
  are the links to download [FragPipe](https://github.com/Nesvilab/FragPipe/releases), 
  [Philosopher](https://github.com/Nesvilab/philosopher), 
  [MSFragger](https://msfragger-upgrader.nesvilab.org/upgrader/) 
  and [IonQuant](https://msfragger.arsci.com/ionquant/), which are needed to complete the study.

  **Note**: Dissimtor works for FragPipe v19.0 - v22.0.
  
## Limitations. 

* HLA-I alleles. Dissimtor works for a large number of HLA-I alleles (to see the list 
of alleles use the argument `--list_alleles`), for which the neural network is created 
and checked (`ANN_alleles` directory). For alleles without an ANN, the file `hla_ann_equivalence.csv` 
provides the most similar available allele whose ANN will be used as a substitute.

  In case a different allele is needed, a neural network would be previously created with the 
script `training_ann_dissimtor.py`.

* FragPipe versions. Dissimtor is an intermediate step between MSFragger and Percolator, 
receiving as `--input-file` the FragPipe .pin using a FDR of 100%. Depending on the FragPipe 
version, there are small differences in the .pin document, so the version of FragPipe used 
must be indicated as an argument of Dissimtor. Nowadays Dissimtor works for FragPipe 
v19.0 - v22.0. 

* Dissimtor currently only considers the modifications: oxidation of methionine, acetylation 
(N-term) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine. A .pin document with other modifications should 
not be passed as `--input-file`.  

## User guide

### Running training_ann_dissimtor in command line interface (headless mode)

`training_ann_dissimtor` can only be run on the command line. To run `training_ann_dissimtor`
in command line interface, using Linux or Windows, in Dissimtor directory:

```bash
python training_ann_dissimtor [-h] [--show-hyperparameter-skf] [--show-plots] [--save-test-subset] allele

# Create an artificial neural network (ANN) for specific HLA-I allele.

Positional arguments:
    allele                        # HLA-I allele for which you want to create an artificial 
                                  # neural network (ANN).

Optional arguments:
    -h | --help                   # show this help message and exit. 
    --show-hyperparameter-skf     # For the best hyperparameters chosen by the author, show 
                                  # the stratified k-fold (SKF) cross-validation.
    --show-plots                  # Show plots of curves of loss vs. epoch when 
                                  # --show-hyperparameter-skf is used.
    --save-test-subset            # Save the test subset (which has not been used to create 
                                  # and train the saved model).
```

### Running Dissimtor in command line interface (headless mode)

`Dissimtor` can only be run from the command line. To run `Dissimtor` in command line interface,
using Linux or Windows, in Dissimtor directory:

```bash
python dissimtor_v1.0_msfragger.py [-h] [--list-alleles] [--A1mol A1MOL] [--A2mol A2MOL] [--B1mol B1MOL]
 [--B2mol B2MOL] [--C1mol C1MOL] [--C2mol C2MOL] [--input-file INPUT_FILE] [--output-file OUTPUT_FILE] 
 [--fragpipe-version {V19,V20,V21,V22}]

# Mass spectrometry (MS) identifications rescoring using using artificial neural networks (ANN).

Arguments:
    -h | --help                   # show this help message and exit.
    --A1mol                       # (optional) HLA-I allele 1; write it in the form 'HLA_X0000' 
                                  # (for example, 'HLA_A0101'). To see the HLA-I alleles for which 
                                  # Dissimtor currently works, use the argument '--list-alleles'. 
                                  # If the rest of HLA-I alleles are not specified, they will be 
                                  # completed with this allele. 
    --A2mol                       # (optional) HLA-I allele 2.
    --B1mol                       # (optional) HLA-I allele 3.
    --B2mol                       # (optional) HLA-I allele 4.
    --C1mol                       # (optional) HLA-I allele 5.
    --C2mol                       # (optional) HLA-I allele 6.
    --input-file                  # Input file name. Indicate the directory and name of the input
                                  # file (with .pin extension; it is the output of MSFragger (FragPipe)
                                  # with FDR 100%).
    --output-file                 # Output file name. Indicate the directory and name of the output 
                                  # file of Dissimtor (with .pin extension; it will be saved in .pin, 
                                  # .csv and .xlsx).
    --fragpipe-version {V19-V22}  # Version of FragPipe used to get the input_file. 
                                  # Versions supported: V19, V20, V21, V22.
```

## Example

In the Dissimtor repository, we find the `test` directory, wich includes the `input_test` subdirectory 
containing an examples of Dissimtor's `input_file` (`v22_Ref8819_MCP_Raji_02_18_20230712.pin`). To generate 
a .pin file as Dissimtor's `input_file`, we used FragPipe with a FDR of 100%, which produces search results 
from MSFragger without being filtered by Percolator. In this analysis, a Raji cell dataset was processed using 
**FragPipe version 22**. Subsequently, the Dissimtor output (.pin file) will be used as input for Percolator, 
applying a given FDR threshold (by default, FDR = 0.01).

Specifically, this is an example involving Raji cells with the HLA alleles HLA_A0301, HLA_B1510, HLA_C0304, 
and HLA_C0401. Since models for these alleles are already available (located in the `ANN_alleles` directory, 
generated by the `training_ann_dissimtor.py script`), it is not necessary to create the models again.

Therefore, we can run `Dissimtor` in command line interface in Dissimtor directory:

```bash
python dissimtor_v1.0_msfragger.py \
    --A1mol HLA_A0301 \
    --B1mol HLA_B1510 \
    --C1mol HLA_C0304 \
    --C2mol HLA_C0401 \
    --input-file test\input_test\v22_Ref8819_MCP_Raji_02_18_20230712.pin \
    --output-file test\output_test\v22_Ref8819_MCP_Raji_02_18_20230712_dissimtor.pin \
    --fragpipe-version V22
 ```

Once we have the Dissimtor output (.pin), we use it as Percolator input (by default, 
FDR=0.01):

```bash
# From the directory where you've downloaded FragPipe, navigate to the
# executable file 'percolator.exe'. For example:
# Downloads\FragPipe-jre-22.0\fragpipe\tools\percolator_3_6_5\windows

percolator.exe \
    - path\to\Dissimtor\test\output_test\v22_Ref8819_MCP_Raji_02_18_20230712_dissimtor.pin \
    > path\to\Dissimtor\test\output_test\v22_Ref8819_MCP_Raji_02_18_20230712_dissimtorPercolator.pin

# [...]
# Found 10087 test set PSMs with q<0.01.
# Tossing out "redundant" PSMs keeping only the best scoring PSM for each unique peptide.
# Calculating q values.
# Final list yields 3365 target peptides with q<0.01.
# [...]
 ```

Finally, to compare the results obtained using Dissimtor (MSFragger-Dissimtor-Percolator) 
and the basic way (MSFragger-Percolator), we use as input to Percolator the .pin file 
that we used in Dissimtor:

```bash
# From the directory where you've downloaded FragPipe, navigate to the
# executable file 'percolator.exe'. 

percolator.exe \
    - path\to\Dissimtor\test\input_test\v22_Ref8819_MCP_Raji_02_18_20230712.pin \
    > path\to\Dissimtor\test\output_test\v22_Ref8819_MCP_Raji_02_18_20230712_Percolator.pin

# [...]
# Found 8697 test set PSMs with q<0.01.
# Tossing out "redundant" PSMs keeping only the best scoring PSM for each unique peptide.
# Calculating q values. 
# Final list yields 3084 target peptides with q<0.01.
# [...]
 ```

 ## Authors

This project was developed by:
- Virginia Carayol Gordillo (vircarayolgordillo@gmail.com).
- Yago Arribas De Sandoval (yago.arribas-de-sandoval@curie.fr).
